ADR to compare different VPNs (#267)
OHS-Hosting-Infrastructure/infrastructure: docs/adr/0013-compare-vpn-edition.md

# Compare OpenVPN CE, OpenVPN Access Server, and AWS VPN
<!-- Source: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/adr/madr/main/template/adr-template.md -->

* Status: proposed by Mondo
* Deciders: ????

> * Date: 2022-23-2022

Reviewer: Date seems wrong

Technical Story: [OHSH-473](https://ocio-jira.acf.hhs.gov/browse/OHSH-473)

## Table of Contents

> <!-- toc -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=1 -->
```
We recently switched from `markdownlint` to `mdformat`: this is the mdformat header for the table of contents.

* [Context and Problem Statement](#context-and-problem-statement)
* [Decision Drivers](#decision-drivers-)
* [Considered Options](#considered-options)
* [Decision Outcome](#decision-outcome)
  * [Positive Consequences](#positive-consequences-)
  * [Negative Consequences](#negative-consequences-)
* [Pros and Cons of the Options](#pros-and-cons-of-the-options-)
  * [OpenVPN CE](#OpenVPN-CE)
  * [OpenVPN Access Server](#OpenVPN-Access-Server)
  * [AWS VPN](#AWS-VPN)

> <!-- Regenerate with "pre-commit run -a markdown-toc" -->
> 
> <!-- tocstop -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- mdformat-toc end -->
```

## Context and Problem Statement

We currently are using OpenVPN for the VPN for OHS. We believe it's the community edition, which is free, but they also offer Access Server which costs money per concurrently connected user. Additionally, AWS offers a VPN we could potentially deploy and use instead as well.

We suspect we want to stick with a flavor of OpenVPN, but it's worth researching and documenting why that and not AWS's VPN option.

## Decision Drivers <!-- optional -->

* implementation  
* user provisioning

## Considered Options

* OpenVPN CE
* OpenVPN Access Server
* AWS VPN

## Decision Outcome

Chosen option:

### Positive Consequences

*
*

### Negative Consequences

*
*

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### OpenVPN CE

> This Is the free and open source version under the OpenVPN Items. All Configuring requires knowledge of Linux and ansible for deployments. Virtually Identical to the paid Access Server version but during a pairing session we discovered that there is no LDAP access. There is a compare sheet provided here (What Are The Main Differences Between OpenVPN Open Source And OpenVPN Access Server? | OpenVPN)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the free and open source version under the OpenVPN Items. All configuring requires knowledge of Linux and Ansible for deployments. Virtually identical to the paid Access Server version, but during a pairing session we discovered that there is no LDAP access. There is a compare sheet provided here (What Are The Main Differences Between OpenVPN Open Source And OpenVPN Access Server? | OpenVPN)
```
The hyperlink isn't working. It should be something like `[Text](url)`

* Good, once configurations are complete deploying can be easy

> * Bad, Having to keep a deploy script up-to-Date

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Bad, because we must maintain deploy scripts
```

> * Bad, With a lack of documentation confusion can accrue

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this means re: the decision-making process that this ADR documents. Have we evaluated the docs for OpenVPN CE and found them lacking?

* Status: proposed by Mondo
* Deciders: Reid, Rebecca, Ryan
* date: 02-22-2022

Technical Story: [OHSH-473](https://ocio-jira.acf.hhs.gov/browse/OHSH-473)

## Table of Contents

<!-- mdformat-toc start --slug=github --no-anchors --maxlevel=6 --minlevel=1 -->

* [Context and Problem Statement](#context-and-problem-statement)
* [Decision Drivers](#decision-drivers-)
* [Considered Options](#considered-options)
* [Decision Outcome](#decision-outcome)
  * [Positive Consequences](#positive-consequences-)
  * [Negative Consequences](#negative-consequences-)
* [Pros and Cons of the Options](#pros-and-cons-of-the-options-)
  * [OpenVPN CE](#OpenVPN-CE)
  * [OpenVPN Access Server](#OpenVPN-Access-Server)
  * [AWS VPN](#AWS-VPN)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Context and Problem Statement

We currently are using OpenVPN for the VPN for OHS. We believe it's the community edition, which is free, but they also offer Access Server which costs money per concurrently connected user. Additionally, AWS offers a VPN we could potentially deploy and use instead as well.

Additionally we are trying to find ways to lessen toil and make it easier for the hosting team to manage users.

> 

Reviewer 2: What is the actual problem statement? "We need to decide on the VPN solution that meets our needs"?

### OpenVPN CE

This is the free and open source version under the OpenVPN Items. All configuring requires knowledge of Linux and Ansible for deployments. Virtually identical to the paid Access Server version but during a pairing session we discovered that there is no LDAP access. There is a compare sheet provided here [What Are The Main Differences Between OpenVPN Open Source And OpenVPN Access Server? | OpenVPN](https://openvpn.net/faq/what-are-the-main-differences-between-openvpn-open-source-and-openvpn-access-server/)

* Good, once configurations are complete deploying can be easy
* Bad, because we must maintain deploy scripts
* Bad, there is no Support from OpenVPN directly, there are a few HOWTO guides to get started but most troubleshooting is through Wiki

### OpenVPN Access Server

This is the paid version of OpenVPN. The biggest difference between this versus the free version is the use of a GUI. Using Ansible to make the configurations can still be used but creating users, Turning on MFA is easier. Through AWSMarketplace all billing will be done through AWS. With 10 Connected devices at a time it is estimated to cost roughly $700 per year.

> Additionally there is a BYOL (bring your own license) model. This will be the cheaper option of the two but making changes to the instance like imaging and relaunching it, or changing the instance type, or enabling auto-scaling, will result in the license key becoming invalid, requiring you to contact us for support on this. The price for this will be $720 per year for the licenses and the cost of the EC2 instance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally there is a BYOL (bring your own license) model. This will be the cheaper option of the two but making changes to the instance like imaging and relaunching it, or changing the instance type, or enabling auto-scaling, will result in the license key becoming invalid, requiring us to contact Support on this. The price for this will be $720 per year for the licenses and the cost of the EC2 instance
```

* Good, because GUI will allow adding users easily
* Good, Configurations can be down Via CLI or GUI interface
* Bad, because depending on the model we choose can limit how much we can automate without interruptions.

### AWS VPN

> From my initial research This VPN option seems confusing. It would take the hosting team some time to learn a new VPN system. All Users will need to be re-added and download a new VPN client software. A factor that I have found is AWS VPN is not FIPS compliant and knowing this is government work that might have an impact on what we can do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From my initial research this VPN option seems confusing. It would take the hosting team some time to learn a new VPN system. All users will need to be re-added and download a new VPN client software. A factor that I have found is AWS VPN is not FIPS compliant and knowing this is government work that might have an impact on what we can do.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: What about the actual functionality of the AWS VPN? Does it meet our needs and once we learn it, would it be easier to maintain and support than the other options?

Author: @ssatagopan I added so more information on AWS VPN. ultimately It could potentially be easier to maintain and support but II would have to test it first before I could give a definite answer

    - [Negative Consequences](#negative-consequences)
  - [Pros and Cons of the Options](#pros-and-cons-of-the-options)
    - [OpenVPN CE](#openvpn-ce)
    - [OpenVPN Access Server](#openvpn-access-server)
    - [AWS VPN](#aws-vpn)

<!-- mdformat-toc end -->

## Context and Problem Statement

We don't have a thorough understanding of our current VPN deployment (which we believe is OpenVPN CE), we do not have any of the configuration in code for easy redeployment, and provisioning of users is a very manual task and lacks MFA for additional security. We are planning to improve this, but want to evaluate in this process if OpenVPN CE still makes the most sense for this project before we invest more time. Specifically we want to evaluate OpenVPN CE, OpenVPN AS, and AWS VPN.

Ultimately we are trying to find ways to lessen toil and make it easier for the hosting team to manage the VPN.

## Decision Drivers

- Cost
- User provisioning, adding and managing users
- Security authorization
- Official vendors support
- Maintenance burdens
- Automation ability

## Considered Options

- OpenVPN CE
- OpenVPN Access Server
- AWS VPN

## Decision Outcome

> Chosen option: OpenVPN Access Server, Would be our best option going forward. the GUI will allow the hosting team manage users easily. Switching to Access Server will have the least amount of down time to deploy and depending on what model is chosen changing the instance or image will result in little downtime.

Reviewer 2: Can we go ahead and propose which Access Server option to go with in this ADR? BYOL or the other one?

Author: Sounds good. I added the clarification on which OpenVPN I would recommend. which would be the one I link and not the BYOL

### Negative Consequences

> * depending on the model type redeploying will require contacting OpenVPN to get a new access key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Depending on the model type, redeploying will require contacting OpenVPN to get a new access key
```

* Good, once configurations are complete deploying can be easy
* Bad, because we must maintain deploy scripts

> * Bad, there is no Support from OpenVPN directly, there are a few HOWTO guides to get started but most troubleshooting is through Wiki

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Bad, because there is no support from OpenVPN directly. There are a few HOWTO guides to get started, but most troubleshooting is through a wiki
```

### AWS VPN

> From my initial research This VPN option seems confusing. It would take the hosting team some time to learn a new VPN system. All Users will need to be re-added and download a new VPN client software. A factor that I have found is AWS VPN is not FIPS compliant and knowing this is government work that might have an impact on what we can do.
> 
> * good, everything stays within AWS
> * Bad, Having to learn a new VPN
> * bad, adding and managing new users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Good, because everything stays within AWS
* Bad, because the hosting team is unfamiliar and would have to learn the new system
* Bad, because all users will need to be re-added and migrate to a new VPN client software
* Bad, because AWS VPN is not FIPS compliant, which could impact our ATO
```
I think this summarizes it? What do you think?
